# 2007.07779_AdapterHub-A-Framework-for-Adapting-Transformers

**Original PDF**: 2007.07779_AdapterHub-A-Framework-for-Adapting-Transformers.pdf
**Conversion Method**: PyMuPDF
**Constitutional Hash**: cdd01ef066bc6cf2

---

## Page 1

AdapterHub: A Framework for Adapting Transformers

Jonas Pfeiffer∗1, Andreas R¨uckl´e∗1, Clifton Poth∗1,

Aishwarya Kamath2, Ivan Vuli´c4, Sebastian Ruder5,

Kyunghyun Cho2,3, Iryna Gurevych1

1Technical University of Darmstadt

2New York University

3CIFAR Associate Fellow

4University of Cambridge

5DeepMind

AdapterHub.ml

Abstract

The current modus operandi in NLP involves

downloading and ﬁne-tuning pre-trained mod-

els consisting of hundreds of millions, or

even billions of parameters.

Storing and

sharing such large trained models is expen-

sive, slow, and time-consuming, which im-

pedes progress towards more general and ver-

satile NLP methods that learn from and for

many tasks.

Adapters—small learnt bottle-

neck layers inserted within each layer of a pre-

trained model— ameliorate this issue by avoid-

ing full ﬁne-tuning of the entire model. How-

ever, sharing and integrating adapter layers is

not straightforward. We propose AdapterHub,

a framework that allows dynamic “stiching-

in” of pre-trained adapters for different tasks

and languages. The framework, built on top

of the popular HuggingFace Transformers li-

brary, enables extremely easy and quick adap-

tations of state-of-the-art pre-trained models

(e.g., BERT, RoBERTa, XLM-R) across tasks

and languages.

Downloading, sharing, and

training adapters is as seamless as possible

using minimal changes to the training scripts

and a specialized infrastructure.

Our frame-

work enables scalable and easy access to shar-

ing of task-speciﬁc models, particularly in low-

resource scenarios. AdapterHub includes all

recent adapter architectures and can be found

at AdapterHub.ml.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in NLP leverage transformer-

based language models (Vaswani et al., 2017), pre-

trained on large amounts of text data (Devlin et al.,

2019; Liu et al., 2019; Conneau et al., 2020). These

models are ﬁne-tuned on a target task and achieve

state-of-the-art (SotA) performance for most nat-

ural language understanding tasks. Their perfor-

mance has been shown to scale with their size (Ka-

plan et al., 2020) and recent models have reached

∗*Equal contribution.

billions of parameters (Raffel et al., 2019; Brown

et al., 2020). While ﬁne-tuning large pre-trained

models on target task data can be done fairly efﬁ-

ciently (Howard and Ruder, 2018), training them

for multiple tasks and sharing trained models is

often prohibitive. This precludes research on more

modular architectures (Shazeer et al., 2017), task

composition (Andreas et al., 2016), and injecting

biases and external information (e.g., world or lin-

guistic knowledge) into large models (Lauscher

et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020).

Adapters (Houlsby et al., 2019) have been in-

troduced as an alternative lightweight ﬁne-tuning

strategy that achieves on-par performance to full

ﬁne-tuning (Peters et al., 2019) on most tasks.

They consist of a small set of additional newly

initialized weights at every layer of the transformer.

These weights are then trained during ﬁne-tuning,

while the pre-trained parameters of the large model

are kept frozen/ﬁxed. This enables efﬁcient pa-

rameter sharing between tasks by training many

task-speciﬁc and language-speciﬁc adapters for the

same model, which can be exchanged and com-

bined post-hoc. Adapters have recently achieved

strong results in multi-task and cross-lingual trans-

fer learning (Pfeiffer et al., 2020a,b).

However, reusing and sharing adapters is not

straightforward. Adapters are rarely released in-

dividually; their architectures differ in subtle yet

important ways, and they are model, task, and lan-

guage dependent. To mitigate these issues and fa-

cilitate transfer learning with adapters in a range of

settings, we propose AdapterHub, a framework that

enables seamless training and sharing of adapters.

AdapterHub is built on top of the popular

transformers framework by HuggingFace1

(Wolf et al., 2020), which provides access to state-

of-the-art pre-trained language models. We en-

1https://github.com/huggingface/transformers

## Page 2

hance transformers with adapter modules that

can be combined with existing SotA models with

minimal code edits. We additionally provide a web-

site that enables quick and seamless upload, down-

load, and sharing of pre-trained adapters. Adapter-

Hub is available online at: AdapterHub.ml.

AdapterHub for the ﬁrst time enables NLP re-

searchers and practitioners to easily and efﬁciently

share and obtain access to models that have been

trained for particular tasks, domains, and languages.

This opens up the possibility of building on and

combining information from many more sources

than was previously possible, and makes research

such as intermediate task training (Pruksachatkun

et al., 2020), composing information from many

tasks (Pfeiffer et al., 2020a), and training models

for very low-resource languages (Pfeiffer et al.,

2020b) much more accessible.

Contributions.

1) We propose an easy-to-use

and extensible adapter training and sharing frame-

work for transformer-based models such as BERT,

RoBERTa, and XLM(-R); 2) we incorporate it into

the HuggingFace transformers framework, re-

quiring as little as two additional lines of code to

train adapters with existing scripts; 3) our frame-

work automatically extracts the adapter weights,

storing them separately to the pre-trained trans-

former model, requiring as little as 1Mb of stor-

age; 4) we provide an open-source framework and

website that allows the community to upload their

adapter weights, making them easily accessible

with only one additional line of code; 5) we in-

corporate adapter composition as well as adapter

stacking out-of-the-box and pave the way for a

wide range of other extensions in the future.

2

Adapters

While the predominant methodology for transfer

learning is to ﬁne-tune all weights of the pre-trained

model, adapters have recently been introduced as

an alternative approach, with applications in com-

puter vision (Rebufﬁet al., 2017) as well as the

NLP domain (Houlsby et al., 2019; Bapna and Firat,

2019; Wang et al., 2020; Pfeiffer et al., 2020a,b).

2.1

Adapter Architecture

Adapters are neural modules with a small amount

of additional newly introduced parameters Φ within

a large pre-trained model with parameters Θ. The

parameters Φ are learnt on a target task while keep-

ing Θ ﬁxed; Φ thus learn to encode task-speciﬁc

representations in intermediate layers of the pre-

trained model. Current work predominantly fo-

cuses on training adapters for each task separately

(Houlsby et al., 2019; Bapna and Firat, 2019; Pfeif-

fer et al., 2020a,b), which enables parallel training

and subsequent combination of the weights.

In NLP, adapters have been mainly used within

deep transformer-based architectures (Vaswani

et al., 2017). At each transformer layer l, a set of

adapter parameters Φl is introduced. The place-

ment and architecture of adapter parameters Φ

within a pre-trained model is non-trivial and may

impact their efﬁcacy: Houlsby et al. (2019) experi-

ment with different adapter architectures, empiri-

cally validating that a two-layer feed-forward neu-

ral network with a bottleneck works well. While

this down- and up-projection has largely been

agreed upon, the actual placement of adapters

within each transformer block, as well as the in-

troduction of new LayerNorms2 (Ba et al., 2016)

varies in the literature (Houlsby et al., 2019; Bapna

and Firat, 2019; Stickland and Murray, 2019; Pfeif-

fer et al., 2020a). In order to support standard

adapter architectures from the literature, as well as

to enable easy extensibility, AdapterHub provides

a conﬁguration ﬁle where the architecture settings

can be deﬁned dynamically. We illustrate the dif-

ferent conﬁguration possibilities in Figure 3, and

describe them in more detail in §3.

2.2

Why Adapters?

Adapters provide numerous beneﬁts over fully ﬁne-

tuning a model such as scalability, modularity, and

composition. We now provide a few use-cases for

adapters to illustrate their usefulness in practice.

Task-speciﬁc Layer-wise Representation Learn-

ing. Prior to the introduction of adapters, in order

to achieve SotA performance on downstream tasks,

the entire pre-trained transformer model needs to

be ﬁne-tuned (Peters et al., 2019). Adapters have

been shown to work on-par with full ﬁne-tuning,

by adapting the representations at every layer. We

present the results of fully ﬁne-tuning the model

compared to two different adapter architectures

on the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2018) in

Table 1. The adapters of Houlsby et al. (2019,

Figure 3c) and Pfeiffer et al. (2020a, Figure 3b)

comprise two and one down- and up-projection

2Layer normalization learns to normalize the inputs across

the features. This is usually done by introducing a new set of

features for mean and variance.

## Page 3

Full

Pfeif. Houl.

RTE (Wang et al., 2018)

66.2

70.8

69.8

MRPC (Dolan and Brockett, 2005)

90.5

89.7

91.5

STS-B (Cer et al., 2017)

88.8

89.0

89.2

CoLA (Warstadt et al., 2019)

59.5

58.9

59.1

SST-2 (Socher et al., 2013)

92.6

92.2

92.8

QNLI (Rajpurkar et al., 2016)

91.3

91.3

91.2

MNLI (Williams et al., 2018)

84.1

84.1

84.1

QQP (Iyer et al., 2017)

91.4

90.5

90.8

Table 1: Mean development scores over 3 runs on

GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) leveraging the BERT-Base

pre-trained weights. We present the results with full

ﬁne-tuning (Full) and with the adapter architectures of

Pfeiffer et al. (2020a, Pfeif., Figure 3b) and Houlsby

et al. (2019, Houl., Figure 3c) both with bottleneck size

48. We show F1 for MRPC, Spearman rank correlation

for STS-B, and accuracy for the rest. RTE is a combi-

nation of datasets (Dagan et al., 2005; Bar-Haim et al.,

2006; Giampiccolo et al., 2007).

within each transformer layer, respectively. The

former adapter thus has more capacity at the cost

of training and inference speed. We ﬁnd that for

all settings, there is no large difference in terms

of performance between the model architectures,

verifying that training adapters is a suitable and

lightweight alternative to full ﬁne-tuning in order

to achieve SotA performance on downstream tasks.

Small, Scalable, Shareable. Transformer-based

models are very deep neural networks with mil-

lions or billions of weights and large storage re-

quirements, e.g., around 2.2Gb of compressed stor-

age space is needed for XLM-R Large (Conneau

et al., 2020). Fully ﬁne-tuning these models for

each task separately requires storing a copy of the

ﬁne-tuned model for each task. This impedes both

iterating and parallelizing training, particularly in

storage-restricted environments.

Adapters mitigate this problem. Depending on

the model size and the adapter bottleneck size, a

single task requires as little as 0.9Mb storage space.

We present the storage requirements in Table 2.

This highlights that > 99% of the parameters re-

quired for each target task are ﬁxed during training

and can be shared across all models for inference.

For instance, for the popular Bert-Base model with

a size of 440Mb, storing 2 fully ﬁne-tuned models

amounts to the same storage space required by 125

models with adapters, when using a bottleneck size

of 48 and adapters of Pfeiffer et al. (2020a). More-

over, when performing inference on a mobile de-

vice, adapters can be leveraged to save a signiﬁcant

amount of storage space, while supporting a large

Base

Large

CRate

#Params

Size

#Params

Size

64

## 0.2M

0.9Mb

## 0.8M

3.2Mb

16

## 0.9M

3.5Mb

## 3.1M

13Mb

2

## 7.1M

28Mb

## 25.2M

97Mb

Table 2: Number of additional parameters and com-

pressed storage space of the adapter of Pfeiffer et al.

(2020a) in (Ro)BERT(a)-Base and Large transformer

architectures. The adapter of Houlsby et al. (2019) re-

quires roughly twice as much space. CRate refers to the

adapter’s compression rate: e.g., a. rate of 64 means

that the adapter’s bottleneck layer is 64 times smaller

than the underlying model’s hidden layer size.

number of target tasks. Additionally, due to the

small size of the adapter modules—which in many

cases do not exceed the ﬁle size of an image—new

tasks can be added on-the-ﬂy. Overall, these factors

make adapters a much more computationally—and

ecologically (Strubell et al., 2019)—viable option

compared to updating entire models (R¨uckl´e et al.,

2020). Easy access to ﬁne-tuned models may also

improve reproducibility as researchers will be able

to easily rerun and evaluate trained models of pre-

vious work.

Modularity of Representations. Adapters learn

to encode information of a task within designated

parameters. Due to the encapsulated placement of

adapters, wherein the surrounding parameters are

ﬁxed, at each layer an adapter is forced to learn

an output representation compatible with the sub-

sequent layer of the transformer model. This set-

ting allows for modularity of components such that

adapters can be stacked on top of each other, or

replaced dynamically. In a recent example, Pfeiffer

et al. (2020b) successfully combine adapters that

have been independently trained for speciﬁc tasks

and languages. This demonstrates that adapters are

modular and that output representations of differ-

ent adapters are compatible. As NLP tasks become

more complex and require knowledge that is not di-

rectly accessible in a single monolithic pre-trained

model (Ruder et al., 2019), adapters will provide

NLP researchers and practitioners with many more

sources of relevant information that can be easily

combined in an efﬁcient and modular way.

Non-Interfering Composition of Information.

Sharing information across tasks has a long-

standing history in machine learning (Ruder, 2017).

Multi-task learning (MTL), which shares a set of

parameters between tasks, has arguably received

## Page 4

the most attention. However, MTL suffers from

problems such as catastrophic forgetting where in-

formation learned during earlier stages of training

is “overwritten” (de Masson d’Autume et al., 2019),

catastrophic interference where the performance of

a set of tasks deteriorates when adding new tasks

(Hashimoto et al., 2017), and intricate task weight-

ing for tasks with different distributions (Sanh et al.,

2019).

The encapsulation of adapters forces them to

learn output representations that are compatible

across tasks. When training adapters on different

downstream tasks, they store the respective infor-

mation in their designated parameters. Multiple

adapters can then be combined, e.g., with atten-

tion (Pfeiffer et al., 2020a). Because the respective

adapters are trained separately, the necessity of

sampling heuristics due to skewed data set sizes

no longer arises. By separating knowledge extrac-

tion and composition, adapters mitigate the two

most common pitfalls of multi-task learning, catas-

trophic forgetting and catastrophic interference.

Overcoming these problems together with the

availability of readily available trained task-speciﬁc

adapters enables researchers and practitioners to

leverage information from speciﬁc tasks, domains,

or languages that is often more relevant for a spe-

ciﬁc application—rather than more general pre-

trained counterparts. Recent work (Howard and

Ruder, 2018; Phang et al., 2018; Pruksachatkun

et al., 2020; Gururangan et al., 2020) has shown the

beneﬁts of such information, which was previously

only available by fully ﬁne-tuning a model on the

data of interest prior to task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning.

3

AdapterHub

AdapterHub consists of two core components:

1) A library built on top of HuggingFace

transformers, and 2) a website that dynam-

ically provides analysis and ﬁltering of pre-trained

adapters. AdapterHub provides tools for the entire

life-cycle of adapters, illustrated in Figure 1 and dis-

cussed in what follows: x introducing new adapter

weights Φ into pre-trained transformer weights Θ;

y training adapter weights Φ on a downstream

task (while keeping Θ frozen); z automatic extrac-

tion of the trained adapter weights Φ′ and open-

sourcing the adapters; { automatic visualization

of the adapters with conﬁguration ﬁlters; | on-the-

ﬂy downloading/caching the pre-trained adapter

weights Φ′ and stitching the adapter into the pre-

1

2

3

4

5

6

## Θ

## Φ

## Θ,Φ’

## Φ’

## Θ

## Φ’

Training

adapters

Inference

Loading model

& adding new adapters

Extracting

and

uploading

adapters

Loading model

& pre-trained adapters

Finding

adapters

Figure 1: The AdapterHub Process graph. Adapters Φ

are introduced into a pre-trained transformer Θ (step

x) and are trained (y). They can then be extracted

and open-sourced (z) and visualized ({). Pre-trained

adapters are downloaded on-the-ﬂy (|) and stitched

into a model that is used for inference (}).

trained transformer model Θ; } performing infer-

ence with the trained adapter transformer model.

x Adapters in Transformer Layers

We minimize the required changes to existing

HuggingFace training scripts, resulting in only

two additional lines of code.

In Figure 2 we

present the required code to add adapter weights

(line 3) and freeze all the transformer weights

Θ (line 4).

In this example, the model is pre-

pared to train a task adapter on the binary ver-

sion of the Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST;

Socher et al., 2013) using the adapter architec-

ture of Pfeiffer et al. (2020a). Similarly, language

adapters can be added by setting the type parameter

to AdapterType.text language, and other

adapter architectures can be chosen accordingly.

While we provide ready-made conﬁguration ﬁles

for well-known architectures in the current litera-

ture, adapters are dynamically conﬁgurable, which

makes it possible to deﬁne a multitude of architec-

tures. We illustrate the conﬁgurable components as

dashed lines and objects in Figure 3. The conﬁg-

urable components are placements of new weights,

residual connections as well as placements of Lay-

erNorm layers (Ba et al., 2016).

The code changes within the HuggingFace

transformers framework are realized through

MixIns, which are inherited by the respective

transformer classes. This minimizes the amount of

code changes of our proposed extensions and en-

## Page 5

1 from transformers import AutoModelForSequenceClassification, AdapterType

2 model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained("roberta-base")

3 model.add_adapter("sst-2", AdapterType.text_task, config="pfeiffer")

4 model.train_adapter(["sst-2"])

5 # Train model ...

6 model.save_adapter("adapters/text-task/sst-2/", "sst-2")

7 # Push link to zip file to AdapterHub ...

Figure 2: x Adding new adapter weights Φ to pre-trained RoBERTa-Base weights Θ (line 3), and freezing Θ (line

4). z Extracting and storing the trained adapter weights Φ′ (line 6).

capsulates adapters as designated classes. It further

increases readability as adapters are clearly sepa-

rated from the main transformers code base,

which makes it easy to keep both repositories in

sync as well as to extend AdapterHub.

y Training Adapters

Adapters are trained in the same manner as full ﬁne-

tuning of the model. The information is passed

through the different layers of the transformer

where additionally to the pre-trained weights at ev-

ery layer the representations are additionally passed

through the adapter parameters. However, in con-

trast to full ﬁne-tuning, the pre-trained weights Θ

are ﬁxed and only the adapter weights Φ and the

prediction head are trained. Because Θ is ﬁxed, the

adapter weights Φ are encapsuled within the trans-

former weights, forcing them to learn compatible

representations across tasks.

z Extracting and Open-Sourcing Adapters

When training adapters instead of full ﬁne-tuning,

it is no longer necessary to store checkpoints of the

entire model. Instead, only the adapter weights Φ′,

as well as the prediction head need to be stored, as

the base model’s weights Θ remain the same. This

is integrated automatically as soon as adapters are

trained, which signiﬁcantly reduces the required

storage space during training and enables storing a

large number of checkpoints simultaneously.

When adapter training has completed, the param-

eter ﬁle together with the corresponding adapter

conﬁguration ﬁle are zipped and uploaded to a pub-

lic server. The user then enters the metadata (e.g.,

URL to weights, user info, description of train-

ing procedure, data set used, adapter architecture,

GitHub handle, Twitter handle) into a designated

YAML ﬁle and issues a pull request to the Adapter-

Hub GitHub repository. When all automatic checks

pass, the AdapterHub.ml website is automatically

regenerated with the newly available adapter, which

makes it possible for users to immediately ﬁnd

Feed

Forward

Add & Norm

Multi-Head

Attention

Add & Norm

Add & Norm

LayerNorm

LayerNorm

FF Down

FF Up

Add & Norm

LayerNorm

LayerNorm

FF Down

FF Up

(a) Conﬁguration Possibilities

(b) Pfeiffer Architecture

(c) Houlsby Architecture

Figure 3: Dynamic customization possibilities where

dashed lines in (a) show the current conﬁguration op-

tions. These options include the placements of new

weights Φ (including down and up projections as well

as new LayerNorms), residual connections, bottleneck

sizes as well as activation functions. All new weights Φ

are illustrated within the pink boxes, everything outside

belongs to the pre-trained weights Θ. In addition, we

provide pre-set conﬁguration ﬁles for architectures in

the literature. The resulting conﬁgurations for the archi-

tecture proposed by Pfeiffer et al. (2020a) and Houlsby

et al. (2019) are illustrated in (b) and (c) respectively.

We also provide a conﬁguration ﬁle for the architecture

proposed by Bapna and Firat (2019), not shown here.

and use these new weights described by the meta-

data. We hope that the ease of sharing pre-trained

adapters will further facilitate and speed up new

developments in transfer learning in NLP.

## Page 6

1 from transformers import AutoModelForSequenceClassification, AdapterType

2 model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained("roberta-base")

3 model.load_adapter("sst-2", config="pfeiffer")

Figure 4: | After the correct adapter has been identiﬁed by the user on the explore page of AdapterHub.ml, they

can load and stitch the pre-trained adapter weights Φ′ into the transformer Θ (line 3).

{ Finding Pre-Trained Adapters

The website AdapterHub.ml provides a dynamic

overview of the currently available pre-trained

adapters. Due to the large number of tasks in many

different languages as well as different transformer

models, we provide an intuitively understandable

hierarchical structure, as well as search options.

This makes it easy for users to ﬁnd adapters that

are suitable for their use-case. Namely, Adapter-

Hub’s explore page is structured into three hier-

archical levels. At the ﬁrst level, adapters can be

viewed by task or language. The second level al-

lows for a more ﬁne-grained distinction separating

adapters into data sets of higher-level NLP tasks

following a categorization similar to paperswith-

code.com. For languages, the second level distin-

guishes the adapters by the language they were

trained on. The third level separates adapters into

individual datasets or domains such as SST for

sentiment analysis or Wikipedia for Swahili.

When a speciﬁc dataset has been selected, the

user can see the available pre-trained adapters for

this setting. Adapters depend on the transformer

model they were trained on and are otherwise not

compatible.3 The user selects the model architec-

ture and certain hyper-parameters and is shown the

compatible adapters. When selecting one of the

adapters, the user is provided with additional infor-

mation about the adapter, which is available in the

metadata (see z again for more information).

| Stitching-In Pre-Trained Adapters

Pre-trained adapters can be stitched into the large

transformer model as easily as adding randomly ini-

tialized weights; this requires a single line of code,

see Figure 4, line 3. When selecting an adapter on

the website (see { again) the user is provided with

sample code, which corresponds to the conﬁgura-

tion necessary to include the speciﬁc weights.4

3We plan to look into mapping adapters between different

models as future work.

4When selecting an adapter based on a name, we allow for

string matching as long as there is no ambiguity.

} Inference with Adapters

Inference with a pre-trained model that relies on

adapters is in line with the standard inference prac-

tice based on full ﬁne-tuning. Similar to training

adapters, during inference the active adapter name

is passed into the model together with the text to-

kens. At every transformer layer the information

is passed through the transformer layers and the

corresponding adapter parameters.

The adapters can be used for inference in the

designated task they were trained on. To this end,

we provide an option to upload the prediction heads

together with the adapter weights. In addition,

they can be used for further research such as trans-

ferring the adapter to a new task, stacking multi-

ple adapters, fusing the information from diverse

adapters, or enriching AdapterHub with adapters

for other modalities, among many other possible

modes of usage and future directions.

4

Conclusion and Future Work

We have introduced AdapterHub, a novel easy-to-

use framework that enables simple and effective

transfer learning via training and community shar-

ing of adapters. Adapters are small neural modules

that can be stitched into large pre-trained trans-

former models to facilitate, simplify, and speed

up transfer learning across a range of languages

and tasks. AdapterHub is built on top of the com-

monly used HuggingFace transformers, and it

requires only adding as little as two lines of code to

existing training scripts. Using adapters in Adapter-

Hub has numerous beneﬁts such as improved re-

producibility, much better efﬁciency compared to

full ﬁne-tuning, easy extensibility to new models

and new tasks, and easy access to trained models.

With AdapterHub, we hope to provide a suit-

able and stable framework for the community to

train, search, and use adapters. We plan to continu-

ously improve the framework, extend the composi-

tion and modularity possibilities, and support other

transformer models, even the ones yet to come.

## Page 7

Acknowledgments

Jonas Pfeiffer is supported by the LOEWE initia-

tive (Hesse, Germany) within the emergenCITY

center. Andreas R¨uckl´e is supported by the Ger-

man Federal Ministry of Education and Research

and the Hessen State Ministry for Higher Educa-

tion, Research and the Arts within their joint sup-

port of the National Research Center for Applied

Cybersecurity ATHENE, and by the German Re-

search Foundation under grant EC 503/1-1 and GU

798/21-1. Aishwarya Kamath is supported in part

by a DeepMind PhD Fellowship. The work of Ivan

Vuli´c is supported by the ERC Consolidator Grant

LEXICAL: Lexical Acquisition Across Languages

(no 648909). Kyunghyun Cho is supported by Sam-

sung Advanced Institute of Technology (Next Gen-

eration Deep Learning: from pattern recognition

to AI) and Samsung Research (Improving Deep

Learning using Latent Structure).

We would like to thank Isabel Pfeiffer for the

illustrations.

References

Jacob Andreas, Marcus Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and

Dan Klein. 2016. Learning to compose neural net-

works for question answering. In NAACL HLT 2016,

The 2016 Conference of the North American Chap-

ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:

Human Language Technologies, San Diego Califor-

nia, USA, June 12-17, 2016, pages 1545–1554.

Lei Jimmy Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hin-

ton. 2016. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint.

Ankur Bapna and Orhan Firat. 2019.

Simple, scal-

able adaptation for neural machine translation. In

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical

Methods in Natural Language Processing and the

9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-

guage Processing, EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019, Hong

Kong, China, November 3-7, 2019, pages 1538–

1548.

Roy Bar-Haim, Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Lisa Ferro,

Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, and Idan

Szpektor. 2006. The second pascal recognising tex-

tual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of the sec-

ond PASCAL challenges workshop on recognising

textual entailment, volume 6, pages 6–4. Venice.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie

Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind

Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda

Askell,

Sandhini Agarwal,

Ariel Herbert-Voss,

Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,

Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,

Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen,

Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin

Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-

Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario

Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learn-

ers. arXiv preprint.

Daniel Cer, Mona Diab, Eneko Agirre, I˜nigo Lopez-

Gazpio, and Lucia Specia. 2017.

SemEval-2017

task 1: Semantic textual similarity multilingual and

crosslingual focused evaluation. In Proceedings of

SemEval-2017.

Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal,

Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco

Guzm´an, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettle-

moyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Unsupervised

cross-lingual representation learning at scale.

In

Proceedings of the 58th Conference of the Associ-

ation for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2020, Vir-

tual Conference, July 6-8, 2020, pages 8440–8451.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.

2005.

The pascal recognising textual entailment

challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges Work-

shop, pages 177–190. Springer.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and

Kristina Toutanova. 2019.

BERT: pre-training of

deep bidirectional transformers for language under-

standing.

In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference

of the North American Chapter of the Association

for Computational Linguistics: Human Language

Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN,

USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Pa-

pers), pages 4171–4186.

William B. Dolan and Chris Brockett. 2005. Automati-

cally constructing a corpus of sentential paraphrases.

In Proceedings of the Third International Workshop

on Paraphrasing, IWP@IJCNLP 2005, Jeju Island,

Korea, October 2005, 2005.

Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan,

and Bill Dolan. 2007. The third pascal recognizing

textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of the

ACL-PASCAL workshop on textual entailment and

paraphrasing, pages 1–9. Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics.

Suchin

Gururangan,

Ana

Marasovic,

Swabha

Swayamdipta, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey,

and Noah A. Smith. 2020. Don’t stop pretraining:

Adapt language models to domains and tasks.

In

Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the

Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL

2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pages 8342–8360.

Kazuma Hashimoto, Caiming Xiong, Yoshimasa Tsu-

ruoka, and Richard Socher. 2017. A joint many-task

model: Growing a neural network for multiple NLP

tasks.

In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on

Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,

EMNLP 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 9-

11, 2017, pages 1923–1933.

## Page 8

Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzkeb-

ski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin de Laroussilhe, An-

drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly.

2019. Parameter-efﬁcient transfer learning for NLP.

In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference

on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019,

Long Beach, California, USA, pages 2790–2799.

Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal

Language Model Fine-tuning for Text Classiﬁcation.

In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As-

sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2018,

Melbourne, Australia, July 15-20, 2018, pages 328–

339.

Shankar Iyer, Nikhil Dandekar, and Kornel Csernai.

First quora dataset release: Question pairs [online].

2017.

Jared Kaplan,

Sam McCandlish,

Tom Henighan,

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,

Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario

Amodei. 2020. Scaling Laws for Neural Language

Models. arXiv preprint.

Anne Lauscher, Ivan Vuli´c, Edoardo Maria Ponti, Anna

Korhonen, and Goran Glavaˇs. 2019.

Specializing

unsupervised pretraining models for word-level se-

mantic similarity. arXiv preprint.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-

dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,

Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.

Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-

proach. arXiv preprint.

Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Sebastian Ruder, Ling-

peng Kong, and Dani Yogatama. 2019.

Episodic

memory in lifelong language learning. In Advances

in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: An-

nual Conference on Neural Information Processing

Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, 8-14 December 2019,

Vancouver, BC, Canada, pages 13122–13131.

Matthew E. Peters, Sebastian Ruder, and Noah A.

Smith. 2019. To tune or not to tune? adapting pre-

trained representations to diverse tasks. In Proceed-

ings of the 4th Workshop on Representation Learn-

ing for NLP, RepL4NLP@ACL 2019, Florence, Italy,

August 2, 2019, pages 7–14.

Jonas Pfeiffer, Aishwarya Kamath, Andreas R¨uckl´e,

Kyunghyun Cho,

and Iryna Gurevych. 2020a.

AdapterFusion: Non-destructive task composition

for transfer learning. arXiv preprint.

Jonas Pfeiffer, Ivan Vuli´c, Iryna Gurevych, and Se-

bastian Ruder. 2020b. MAD-X: An Adapter-based

Framework for Multi-task Cross-lingual Transfer.

In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical

Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP

2020, Virtual Conference.

Jason Phang, Thibault F´evry, and Samuel R Bowman.

2018. Sentence encoders on stilts: Supplementary

training on intermediate labeled-data tasks. arXiv

preprint.

Yada Pruksachatkun,

Jason Phang,

Haokun Liu,

Phu Mon Htut, Xiaoyi Zhang, Richard Yuanzhe

Pang, Clara Vania, Katharina Kann, and Samuel R.

Bowman. 2020. Intermediate-task transfer learning

with pretrained language models: When and why

does it work?

In Proceedings of the 58th Annual

Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-

guistics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pages

5231–5247.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine

Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,

Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2019. Exploring the Lim-

its of Transfer Learning with a Uniﬁed Text-to-Text

Transformer. arXiv preprint.

Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and

Percy Liang. 2016.

SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions

for Machine Comprehension of Text. In Proceed-

ings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-

ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2016,

Austin, Texas, USA, November 1-4, 2016, pages

2383–2392.

Sylvestre-Alvise Rebufﬁ, Hakan Bilen, and Andrea

Vedaldi. 2017.

Learning multiple visual domains

with residual adapters. In Advances in Neural Infor-

mation Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference

on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, 4-

9 December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages

506–516.

Andreas R¨uckl´e,

Gregor Geigle,

Max Glockner,

Tilman Beck, Jonas Pfeiffer, Nils Reimers, and Iryna

Gurevych. 2020. AdapterDrop: On the Efﬁciency of

Adapters in Transformers. arXiv preprint.

Sebastian Ruder. 2017.

An Overview of Multi-Task

Learning in Deep Neural Networks. arXiv preprint.

Sebastian

Ruder,

Matthew

## E

Peters,

Swabha

Swayamdipta, and Thomas Wolf. 2019.

Trans-

fer learning in natural language processing.

In

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North

American Chapter of the Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,

NAACL-HLT (Tutorials), 2019, Minneapolis, MN,

USA, June 2-7, 2019.

Victor Sanh, Thomas Wolf, and Sebastian Ruder. 2019.

A hierarchical multi-task approach for learning em-

beddings from semantic tasks. In The Thirty-Third

AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI

2019, The Thirty-First Innovative Applications of

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2019, The

Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances

in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2019, Honolulu,

Hawaii, USA, January 27 - February 1, 2019, pages

6949–6956.

Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz,

Andy Davis, Quoc V. Le, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and

Jeff Dean. 2017.

Outrageously large neural net-

works: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer.

## Page 9

In 5th International Conference on Learning Repre-

sentations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26,

2017, Conference Track Proceedings.

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason

Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Y. Ng,

and Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep mod-

els for semantic compositionality over a sentiment

treebank.

In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference

on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-

ing, EMNLP 2013, 18-21 October 2013, Grand Hy-

att Seattle, Seattle, Washington, USA, A meeting of

SIGDAT, a Special Interest Group of the ACL, pages

1631–1642.

Asa Cooper Stickland and Iain Murray. 2019. BERT

and pals:

Projected attention layers for efﬁcient

adaptation in multi-task learning.

In Proceedings

of the 36th International Conference on Machine

Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach,

California, USA, pages 5986–5995.

Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCal-

lum. 2019.

Energy and policy considerations for

deep learning in NLP. In Proceedings of the 57th

Conference of the Association for Computational

Linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- Au-

gust 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, pages 3645–

3650.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob

Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz

Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention Is All

You Need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-

cessing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural

Information Processing Systems 2017, 4-9 Decem-

ber 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 5998–6008.

Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Fe-

lix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman.

2018.

GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and anal-

ysis platform for natural language understand-

ing.

In Proceedings of the Workshop: Analyzing

and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, Black-

boxNLP@EMNLP 2018, Brussels, Belgium, Novem-

ber 1, 2018, pages 353–355.

Ruize Wang, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Zhongyu Wei, Xu-

anjing Huang, Jianshu Ji, Guihong Cao, Daxin Jiang,

and Ming Zhou. 2020. K-adapter: Infusing knowl-

edge into pre-trained models with adapters. arXiv

preprint.

Alex Warstadt, Amanpreet Singh, and Samuel R. Bow-

man. 2019. Neural network acceptability judgments.

Transactions of the Association for Computational

Linguistics, 7:625–641.

Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R. Bow-

man. 2018.

A broad-coverage challenge corpus

for sentence understanding through inference.

In

Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North

American Chapter of the Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,

NAACL-HLT 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA,

June 1-6, 2018, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages

1112–1122.

Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien

Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi an-

dArt Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, R´emi Louf, Mor-

gan Funtowicz, and Jamie Brew. 2020.

Hugging-

Face’s Transformers: State-of-the-art Natural Lan-

guage Processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-

ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language

Processing (System Demonstrations), EMNLP 2020,

Virtual Conference, 2020.
