# 2301.13819_Causal-Discovery-Performance-of-ChatGPT-in-the-con

**Original PDF**: 2301.13819_Causal-Discovery-Performance-of-ChatGPT-in-the-con.pdf
**Conversion Method**: PyMuPDF
**Constitutional Hash**: cdd01ef066bc6cf2

---

## Page 1

Causal-Discovery Performance of ChatGPT in the context

of Neuropathic Pain Diagnosis

Ruibo Tu

ruibo@kth.se

KTH Royal Institute of Technology

Chao Ma

chaoma@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research

Cheng Zhang

cheng.zhang@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research

Introduction.

ChatGPT[3] has demonstrated exceptional proﬁciency in natural language conversation,

e.g., it can answer a wide range of questions while no previous large language models can. Thus, we would

like to push its limit and explore its ability to answer causal discovery questions by using a medical benchmark

[5] in causal discovery.

Causal discovery aims to uncover the underlying unknown causal relationships based purely on observational

data[2]. In contrast, applying ChatGPT to answer the questions about causal relationships is fundamentally

diﬀerent. With the current version of ChatGPT, we can only use the names (meta information) instead

of observational data of variables to answer causal questions. The answers to the causal questions given

by ChatGPT are based on a trained large language model, which can be viewed as an approximation for

existing knowledge in the training natural language data. Nevertheless, such investigations still provide us

valuable insights into ChatGPT and raise more thoughts about how to leverage its ability. But we need to

exercise great caution in the conclusion as benchmarks [4, 5] utilizing known knowledge are set for evaluation

purposes instead of the goal of the causal discovery.

Figure 1: Dermatome map [1] as a reference for this benchmark.

Precision

Recall

F-score

1

0.12

0.2142857143

Table 1:

Test results demonstrate

high precision and low recall.

Negative

Positive

Negative

50

44

Positive

0

6

Table 2: Confusion matrix showing

that there were no false positives.

Rows are predictions and columns

are ground truth.

Results and Insights.

The ground-truth causal relationships in neuropathic pain diagnosis are obtained

from both a domain expert and known medical literature [5]. As the number of all possible cause-eﬀect pairs

in this context is huge (more than 10000 pairs), we cannot test all of them manually. Thus, we sub-sampled

50 positive pairs (ground-true causal relationships) and 50 negative pairs (wrong causal relationships) from

1

arXiv:2301.13819v2  [cs.CL]  6 Feb 2023

## Page 2

the dataset and generated the question in the format of "X causes Y. Answer true or false", where X and Y

are sampled pairs from the full causal map of the neuropathic pain dataset. The full test results can be found

at shorturl.at/amBX1. Many individual answers are reasonable, such as in Figure 2, but the performance

is still ﬂowed currently. As shown in Table 1 and 2, ChatGPT tends to make false negative mistakes. We

inspected the results qualitatively and quantitatively and observed that:

It only understands the languages that are typically used to describe the situations but not the underlying

knowledge. We provide two examples to demonstrate it. The ﬁrst example is shown in Figure 3. It cannot

identify the lower abdominal discomfort that can be caused by T12 radiculopathy. The explanation identiﬁes

the lower back, hip, and leg region only, while T12 nerve goes through these regions shown in Figure 1, and

the lower abdominal region is part of it. Thus, it indicates that it provides the answer based on the trained

content but does not understand the human body’s nervous system. The second example is shown in Figure

4, which demonstrates a lack of understanding of how regional discomfort is described. The region around

the key bone is the upper shoulder region. ChatGPT can identify shoulder discomfort as an eﬀect but not

the discomfort around the key bone.

Its performance is not yet consistent and not stable. Firstly, we observe that it provides diﬀerent answers

to the same question. We have tested some of the queries twice on diﬀerent days. As shown in Table 3, the

answers on the ﬁrst day diﬀer from the ones on the second day signiﬁcantly. The answers on the second

day are much more conservative to claim a causal relationship. This may be due to internal model updates.

Such inconsistent performance is a major concern for answering causal questions. As the later results have

very few positive answers, the ﬁnal results that we used considered the earlier results when available for the

table 1 and 2. Secondly, as the original dataset is associated with terms in Swedish, we found that ChatGPT

can correctly identify Swedish in some cases, such as in Figure 2, but fails in some other cases, such as in

Figure 5. This may contribute further to a large number of false negatives.

Conclusion.

Based on the observations, we ﬁnd:

• There are some limitations for the current ChatGPT in terms of understanding new concepts and

knowledge beyond the existing corpus of text training data. Moreover, the consistency and stability

of its performance need to be improved. Such improvements can happen without a paradigm shift

in the models.

• We need to be extremely cautious about using causal claims made by ChatGPT as causal discovery

results. This is because causal discovery and causal question answering with large language models

are fundamentally diﬀerent tasks.

Causal benchmarks may be biased towards utilizing existing

knowledge for evaluation [5, 4], which is against the goal of causal discovery.

• In some situations, ChatGPT does give correct answers that can be non-trivial to obtain from a

domain expert, which could serve as a good complementary for causal discovery methods to resolve

corner cases. This might open up new research opportunities for the causal community on utilizing

the recent developments of large language models to complement, improve and develop better causal

machine learning tools.

Although there are existing limitations, we believe that opportunities for ChatGPT can help to improve the

causality research is huge. With deep integration with ChatGPT type of models and interface. We can also

imagine a future where ChatGPT can answer diﬀerent causal questions.

2

## Page 3

Figure 2: Example showing that ChatGPT can correctly answer the question and provide reasonable expla-

nations.

Figure 3: The lower abdominal is the region where T12 nerve passes. If looking at the dermatome map 1, it

is easy to identify lower back, hip, and lower abdominal discomfort can all be caused by T12 radiculopathy.

3

## Page 4

Figure 4: Example showing that ChatGPT fails to understand the region on the body. The area around

the key bone is largely overlapping with the front shoulder area especially when the patient describes the

symptoms.

Figure 5: Example showing that ChatGPT can identify foreign language time by time and that it is not very

reliable.

4

## Page 5

Query

GroundTruth

from

Ex-

pert

Jan18

Test

Jan19

Test

L L4 Radikulopati causes R Höftkamsbesvär."R" and "L" refer to the

right and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

0

0

L T12 Radikulopati causes L Nedre bukbesvär."R" and "L" refer to the

right and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

0

0

R L1 Radikulopati causes L Ljumskbesvär."R" and "L" refer to the right

and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

0

0

R C6 Radikulopati causes L Laterala armsbesvär."R" and "L" refer to

the right and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or

false.

## True

1

0

R C6 Radikulopati causes R Armbågsbesvär."R" and "L" refer to the

right and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

1

0

R L1 Radikulopati causes IBS."R" and "L" refer to the right and left

sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

0

0

L C5 Radikulopati causes Nackbesvär."R" and "L" refer to the right and

left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

1

0

R C5 Radikulopati causes R Laterala armbågsbesvär."R" and "L" refer

to the right and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or

false.

## True

0

0

L C6 Radikulopati causes R Handbesvär."R" and "L" refer to the right

and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

1

0

L L4 Radikulopati causes L Laterala vadbesvär."R" and "L" refer to the

right and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

0

0

R S1 Radikulopati causes R Lårbesvär."R" and "L" refer to the right and

left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

1

0

L T5 Radikulopati causes L Bröstbesvär."R" and "L" refer to the right

and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

0

0

L C5 Radikulopati causes R Interskapulära besvär."R" and "L" refer to

the right and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or

false.

## True

0

0

R C6 Radikulopati causes R Under armsbesvär."R" and "L" refer to the

right and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

0

0

L L1 Radikulopati causes L Mediala ljumskbesvär."R" and "L" refer to

the right and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or

false.

## True

0

0

L L1 Radikulopati causes L Adduktortendalgi."R" and "L" refer to the

right and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

0

0

L T10 Radikulopati causes IBS."R" and "L" refer to the right and left

sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

0

0

R L5 Radikulopati causes L Bakhuvudvärk."R" and "L" refer to the right

and left sides of the body, respectively).Answer with true or false.

## True

0

0

Table 3: Results demonstrate lack of consistency using ChatGPT.

5

## Page 6

References

[1] Dermatome map. https://i.pinimg.com/736x/ef/76/47/ef7647ceae98d10588f14b4ecd7e6a89.jpg.

[2] C. Glymour, K. Zhang, and P. Spirtes. Review of causal discovery methods based on graphical models.

Frontiers in genetics, 10:524, 2019.

[3] OpenAI. Chatgpt. https://chat.openai.com/chat/.

[4] A. Sharma. Chatgpt causality pairs. https://github.com/amit-sharma/chatgpt-causality-pairs.

[5] R. Tu, K. Zhang, B. Bertilson, H. Kjellstrom, and C. Zhang. Neuropathic pain diagnosis simulator for

causal discovery algorithm evaluation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

6
