# 2307.02390_Causal-Discovery-with-Language-Models-as-Imperfect

**Original PDF**: 2307.02390_Causal-Discovery-with-Language-Models-as-Imperfect.pdf
**Conversion Method**: PyMuPDF
**Constitutional Hash**: cdd01ef066bc6cf2

---

## Page 1

Causal Discovery with Language Models as Imperfect Experts

Stephanie Long * 1 Alexandre Pich´e * 2 3 4 Valentina Zantedeschi * 2 Tibor Schuster 1 Alexandre Drouin 2 4

Abstract

Understanding the causal relationships that

underlie a system is a fundamental prerequisite

to accurate decision-making. In this work, we

explore how expert knowledge can be used to

improve the data-driven identification of causal

graphs, beyond Markov equivalence classes. In

doing so, we consider a setting where we can query

an expert about the orientation of causal relation-

ships between variables, but where the expert may

provide erroneous information. We propose strate-

gies for amending such expert knowledge based on

consistency properties, e.g., acyclicity and condi-

tional independencies in the equivalence class. We

then report a case study, on real data, where a large

language model is used as an imperfect expert.

1. Introduction

Understanding the cause-and-effect relationships that under-

lie a complex system is critical to accurate decision-making.

Unlike any statistical association, causal relationships allow

us to anticipate the system’s response to interventions.

Currently, randomized control trials (RCTs) serve as the

gold standard for establishing causation (Peters et al., 2017).

However, RCTs can be costly and oftentimes impractical

or unethical. As such, there has been growing interest in

causal discovery, which aims to uncover causal relationships

from data collected by passively observing a system (see

(Glymour et al., 2019) for a review).

Causal discovery methods have been successfully applied in

various fields, including genetics (Sachs et al., 2005) and cli-

mate science (Runge et al., 2019). Nevertheless, a fundamen-

tal limitation of such methods is their ability to only recover

the true graph of causal relationships up to a set of equivalent

solutions known as the Markov equivalence class (MEC),

leading to uncertainty in downstream applications, such as

*Equal contribution 1McGill University 2ServiceNow Research

3Universit´e de Montr´eal 4Mila - Quebec AI Institute. Correspon-

dence to: Valentina Zantedeschi <vzantedeschi@gmail.com>.

Accepted to ICML workshop on Structured Probabilistic Inference

& Generative Modeling, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202,

2023. Copyright 2023 by the author(s).

estimating the effect of interventions (Maathuis et al., 2009).

One approach to reducing such uncertainty is the incorpo-

ration of expert knowledge, e.g., to rule out the existence of

certain edges and reduce the set of possible solutions (Meek,

1995). However, such methods typically assume that the

knowledge provided by the expert is correct. In this work, we

consider a more realistic case, where the expert is potentially

incorrect. Our approach leverages such imperfect experts,

e.g., large language models, to reduce uncertainty in the

output of a causal discovery algorithm by orienting edges,

while maintaining fundamental consistency properties, such

as the acyclicity of the causal graph and the conditional

independencies in the MEC.

Contributions:

• We formalize the use of imperfect experts in causal

discovery as an optimization problem that minimizes

the size of the MEC while ensuring that the true graph

is still included (Section 3).

• We propose a greedy approach that relies on Bayesian

inference to optimize this objective by incrementally

incorporating expert knowledge (Section 4).

• We empirically evaluate the performance of our ap-

proach, on real data, with an expert that returns correct

orientations with some fixed probability (Section 5).

• We then empirically assess if the approach holds when

taking a large language model as the expert – with

mitigated results (Section 5).

2. Background and Related Work

We now review key background concepts and related work.

Causal Bayesian networks:

Let X := (X1,...,Xd) be a

vector of d random variables with distribution p(X) and

G⋆:= ⟨VG⋆,EG⋆⟩be a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with

vertices VG⋆={v1,...,vd} and edges EG⋆⊂VG⋆× VG⋆.

Each vertex vi ∈VG⋆corresponds to a random variable

Xi and a directed edge (vi,vj) ∈EG⋆represents a direct

causal relationship from Xi to Xj. We assume that p(X) is

Markovian with respect to G⋆, i.e.,

p(X1,...,Xd)=

d

## Y

i=1

p(Xi |paG⋆

i

),

arXiv:2307.02390v1  [cs.AI]  5 Jul 2023

## Page 2

Causal Discovery with Language Models as Imperfect Experts

where paG⋆

i

denotes the parents of Xi in G⋆.

Causal discovery:

This task consists of recovering G⋆

from data, which are typically sampled from p(X) (Glymour

et al., 2019). Existing methods can be broadly classified as

being: i) constraint-based (Spirtes et al., 2000; 2013), which

use conditional independence tests to rule-out edges, or ii)

score-based (Chickering, 2002; Zheng et al., 2018), which

search for the DAG that optimizes some scoring function.

One common limitation of these approaches is their inability

to fully identify the true underlying graph G⋆beyond its

Markov equivalence class (MEC) (Peters et al., 2017).

Equivalence classes: The MEC, MG⋆, is a set of graphs

that includes G⋆and all other DAGs with equivalent

conditional independences. These may have different edge

orientations, leading to uncertainty in downstream tasks,

such as treatment effect estimation (Maathuis et al., 2009).

One common approach to reducing the size of MG⋆is to in-

clude interventional data (Eberhardt et al., 2005; Brouillard

et al., 2020; Mooij et al., 2020). However, similar to RCTs,

the collection of such data may not always be feasible or ethi-

cal. An alternative approach, which we adopt in this work, is

to eliminate graphs that are deemed implausible by an expert.

Expert knowledge: Previous work has considered experts

that give: (i) forbidden edges (Meek, 1995), (ii) (partial) or-

derings of the variables (Scheines et al., 1998; Andrews et al.,

2020), (iii) ancestral constraints (de Campos & Castellano,

2007; Li & Beek, 2018; Chen et al., 2016), and (iv) con-

straints on interactions between types of variables (Brouillard

et al., 2022) (see Constantinou et al. (2023) for a review).

Typically, all DAGs that are contradicted by the expert are

discarded, resulting in a new equivalence class ME ⊆MG⋆.

One pitfall is that, realistically, an expert is unlikely to

always be correct, and thus, G⋆might be discarded, i.e.,

G⋆̸∈ME. In this work, we attempt to reduce MG⋆as much

as possible, while ensuring G⋆∈ME with high probability,

in the presence of imperfect expert knowledge. We note that

our work is akin to Oates et al. (2017), but a key difference

is that they assume a directionally informed expert, i.e., that

cannot misorient edges in G⋆. Moreover, their approach is

expert-first, i.e., data is used to expand an initial graph given

by an expert, while our approach is data-first, i.e., the expert

is used to refine the solution of a causal discovery algorithm.

Large language models:

In situations where access to

human experts is limited, Large Language Models (LLMs),

such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023a), offer promising alternatives.

Recent studies have demonstrated that certain LLMs possess

a rich knowledge base that encompasses valuable informa-

tion for causal discovery (Choi et al., 2022; Long et al., 2023;

Hobbhahn et al., 2022; Willig et al., 2022; Kıcıman et al.,

2023; Tu et al., 2023), achieving state-of-the-art accuracy

on datasets such as the T¨ubingen pairs (Mooij et al., 2016).

In this work, we investigate the use of LLMs as imperfect

experts within the context of causal discovery. Unlike prior

approaches, which typically assume the correctness of ex-

tracted knowledge,1 we propose strategies to use, potentially

incorrect, LLM knowledge to eliminate some graphs in

MG⋆, while ensuring that G⋆∈ME with high probability.

3. Problem Setting

We now formalize our problem of interest. Let G⋆represent

the true causal DAG, as defined in Section 2, and let MG⋆

be its MEC. We assume that MG⋆is known, e.g., that it has

been obtained via some causal discovery algorithm. Further,

we assume the availability of metadata {µ1,...,µd}, where

each µi provides some information about Xi, e.g., a name,

a brief description, etc. We then assume access to an expert,

who consumes such metadata and makes decisions:

Definition 3.1. (Expert) An expert is a function that, when

queried with the metadata for a pair of variables (µi,µj),

returns a hypothetical orientation for the Xi−Xj edge:

E(µi,µj)=

 →

if it believes that (vi,vj)∈EG⋆

←

if it believes that (vj,vi)∈EG⋆. (1)

Of note, E(µi,µj) can be incorrect (imperfect expert) and

thus, our problem of interest consists in elaborating strategies

to maximally make use of such imperfect knowledge.

Let U(MG⋆) be the set of indices of all pairs of variables

related by an edge whose orientation is ambiguous in MG⋆:

U(MG⋆):={(i,j)|i<j and ∃G,G′ ∈MG⋆s.t.

(vi,vj)∈EG∧(vj,vi)∈EG′}.

(2)

We aim to elaborate a strategy S that uses the expert’s

knowledge to orient edges in U(MG⋆) and obtain a new

equivalence class ME,S, such that uncertainty is reduced

to the minimum, i.e., |ME,S|≪|MG⋆|, but G⋆still belongs

to ME,S with high probability, that is:

min

## Me,S

(3)

such that p

##  G⋆∈Me,S

≥1−η,

where η ∈[0,1] quantifies tolerance to the risk that the true

graph G⋆is not in the resulting equivalence class. This prob-

lem can be viewed as a trade-off between reducing uncer-

tainty, by shrinking the set of plausible DAGs, and the risk as-

sociated with making decisions based on an imperfect expert.

4. Strategies for Imperfect Experts

Instead of blindly accepting expert orientations, we leverage

the consistency information provided by the true MEC to

estimate which decisions are most likely incorrect. Indeed,

1The Bayesian approach of Choi et al. (2022) is an exception.

## Page 3

Causal Discovery with Language Models as Imperfect Experts

among all possible combinations of edge orientations, only

a few are possible, since many of them would create cycles

or introduce new v-structures. The different strategies that

we now propose for solving Problem (3) leverage such

consistency imperatives, as well as Bayesian inference, to

increase robustness to errors in expert knowledge.

Noise model: First, let us define the noise model that, we

assume, characterizes mistakes made by the expert. Figure 1

shows the dependency graph for the decision process of a

type of imperfect expert that we dub “ε-expert”. For any pair

pi =(pi1,pi2)∈U(MG⋆), we use the notation Opi to denote

the unknown true edge orientation and Epi :=E(µpi1,µpi2)

denotes the orientation given by the expert. Further, for any

subset of indices I ⊆U(MG⋆), we use OI :={Opi}|I|

i=1; the

same applies to EI. Notice that (i) true edge orientations are,

in general, interdependent because of the aforementioned

consistency properties of the MEC, and that (ii) edges already

oriented in MG⋆are not represented since they are constants

(i.e., the expert is not queried for those). In this model, we

assume that, for any pi ∈U(MG⋆), the expert’s response de-

pends only on the true value Opi, i.e., p(Epi |OU(MG⋆))=

p(Epi |Opi) and is incorrect with constant probability ε.

We now define the components of our Bayesian approach.

Prior: We consider a simple prior that encodes the knowl-

edge given by the true MEC. It boils down to an uniform prior

over the graphs in MG⋆, effectively assigning no mass to any

edge combination that is not consistent (creates a cycle or a

new v-structure). Thus, the prior for a partial edge orientation

OI corresponds to its frequency in the graphs of MG⋆:

p(OI) =

## X

o¬I

p

 OI, OU(MG⋆)\I = o¬I



,

where we marginalize over all possible combinations of

values, o¬I, for the remaining unoriented edges OU(MG⋆)\I.

Posterior: The posterior probability that orientations for

all edges in U(MG⋆) are correct, given all observed expert

decisions EU(MG⋆), is then given by:

p

##  Ou(Mg⋆) |Eu(Mg⋆)



=

p

##  Eu(Mg⋆) |Ou(Mg⋆)



p

##  Ou(Mg⋆)



p

##  Eu(Mg⋆)



, (4)

where, for the ε-expert noise model, the likelihood is s.t.,

p(EU(MG⋆) |OU(MG⋆))

=

## Y

pi∈U(MG⋆)

p(Epi |Opi).

In contrast, due to interdependencies between the true edge

orientations, the posterior probability cannot similarly be

factorized and, in general, p(Opi |EU(MG⋆))̸=p(Opi |Epi).

Note that the posterior for a subset edges I ⊆U(MG⋆), e.g,

oriented by an iterative strategy, can be obtained via simple

marginalization. Finally, note that the posterior can be used

to estimate p

##  G⋆∈Me,S

, since any mistake in orienting

pi ∈U(MG⋆) results in excluding G⋆from ME,S.

Op1

Op2

...

Opu

Ep1

Ep2

...

Epu

Figure 1. The ϵ-expert’s dependency graph between true edge ori-

entations (Opi) and expert decisions (Epi), where u=|U(MG⋆)|.

Greedy approach:

We now propose a greedy strategy

for optimizing Problem (3) that iteratively orients edges in

U(MG⋆). Let M(t) denote the MEC at the t-th iteration

of the algorithm and let M(t)

pi denote the MEC resulting

from additionally orienting pi ∈U(M(t)) at step t and

propagating any consequential orientations using Meek

(1995)’s rules. The algorithm starts with M(1) =MG⋆. We

consider two strategies to greedily select the best pi:

1. Ssize:

selects the edge that leads to the smallest

equivalence class:

argmin

pi

|M(t)

pi |

2. Srisk: selects the edge that leads to the lowest risk of

excluding G⋆from the equivalence class:

argmin

pi



1−p



## Ou(Mg⋆)\U



M(t)

pi

##  |Eu(Mg⋆)



This procedure is repeated while p



G⋆∈M(t)

pi



, estimated

according to Equation (4), is greater or equal to 1−η.

5. Results and Discussion

We now evaluate the ability of our approach to leverage im-

perfect expert knowledge using real-world causal Bayesian

networks from the bnlearn repository (Scutari, 2010).

Networks:

We considered the following networks: (i)

Asia (Lauritzen & Spiegelhalter, 1988), (ii) ALARM (Bein-

lich et al., 1989), (iii) CHILD (Spiegelhalter & Cowell,

1992), and (iv) Insurance (Binder et al., 1997). For each

network, we extracted variable descriptions from the related

publication and used them as metadata µi (see Appendix C).

Experts: We considered two kinds of expert: (i) ε-experts,

as defined in Section 4, with various levels ε, and (ii)

LLM-based experts based on GPT-3.5 (Ouyang et al., 2022).

Details about prompting can be found at Appendix D. For

each kind of expert, we considered both strategies: Ssize

and Srisk. Moreover, for the LLM-based expert, we also

considered a naive strategy that consists of simply orienting

all edges according to the expert, as in Long et al. (2023).

## Page 4

Causal Discovery with Language Models as Imperfect Experts

0

10

20

30

MEC Size |

## E, S|

0

5

10

15

## Shd

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

insurance

p(G *

## E, S)

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

2

4

6

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

1

2

3

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

asia

0.1-expert

0.3-expert

text-davinci-002

text-davinci-002-naive

text-davinci-003

text-davinci-003-naive

Figure 2. Results for Insurance and Asia and strategy Srisk. For the ε-experts, we consider ε∈{0.1,0.3}. For the LLM-based experts,

we consider the text-davinci-{002, 003} versions of GPT-3.5. We also report results for naive variants that follow Long et al. (2023)

and do not make use of our greedy approach. Error bars show a 95% confidence interval. For all experts, except for text-davinci-003,

both the MEC size and SHD decrease as tolerance is increased and p(G⋆∈ME,S)≥1−η.

Metrics: The expert/strategy combinations were evaluated

based on: (i) the resulting size of their equivalence class,

|ME,S|, (ii) the structural Hamming distance (SHD)

between the completed partially DAG (CP-DAG; see

Glymour et al. (2019)) of ME,S and the true graph G⋆,

(iii) an empirical estimate of p(G⋆∈ME,S), taken over

repetitions of the experiment.

Protocol: For each Bayesian network, we extracted the

MEC MG⋆based on the structure of G⋆. This simulates

starting from the ideal output of a causal discovery algorithm.

We then attempted to reduce the size of MG⋆by querying

each expert according to the greedy approach in Section 4

for η ∈[0.1,1], where η =1 corresponds to disregarding the

constraint of Problem 4. Each ε−expert experiment was

repeated 5 times and LLM-expert experiment was repeated

8 times. Given that the LLM-experts have a deterministic

output for a given prompt, we randomized the causation verb

in order to introduce stochasticity (see Appendix D). Figure 2

shows the results of our experiments for Insurance and

Asia with strategy Srisk. Results for other networks and

strategy Ssize are in Appendix A.

Results for ε-experts: On all networks, our approach, com-

bined with both strategies, decreases the MEC’s size for all

noise levels (ε), while keeping the true graph in ME,S with

probability at least 1−η, as predicted by our theoretical re-

sults. Consequently, the SHD also decreases as the tolerance

to risk increases. This highlights the effectiveness of our ap-

proach when the expert satisfies the noise model of Section 4.

Results for the LLM-expert: Overall, we observe a clear

reduction in SHD for ME,S compared to the starting point

MG⋆. This shows that some causally-relevant knowledge

can be extracted from LLMs, which is in line with the

conclusions of recent work.

On all datasets, the LLM-based experts achieve SHDs that are

on par or better than those of their naive counterparts (Long

et al., 2023) for η = 1, while additionally enabling the

control of the probability of excluding G⋆. Further, on

every dataset, except for ALARM, each LLM-based expert

performs comparably to at least one of the ε-experts. For

ALARM, we observe that G⋆is excluded from ME,S, even

for small tolerance η. This can be explained by ambiguities

in the metadata, which are sometimes ambiguous even for

human experts (see Appendix C).

Finally, another key observation is the poor uncertainty

calibration

of

text-davinci-003

compared

to

text-davinci-002, which is in line with observations

made by OpenAI (2023b). The text-davinci-003

model is often over-confident in its answers, which leads it to

underestimate the probability of excluding G⋆from ME,S.

Consequently, even for small tolerance η, the resulting

equivalence classes contain incorrectly oriented edges.

## Page 5

Causal Discovery with Language Models as Imperfect Experts

6. Conclusion

This work studied how imperfect expert knowledge can

be used to refine the output of causal discovery algorithms.

We proposed a greedy algorithm that iteratively rejects

graphs from a MEC, while controlling the probability of

excluding the true graph. Our empirical study revealed that

our approach is effective when combined with experts that

satisfy our assumptions. However, its performance was

mitigated when a LLM was used as the expert. Nevertheless,

our results show the clear potential of LLMs to aid causal

discovery and we believe that further research in this direc-

tion is warranted. Possible extensions to this work include

the exploration of noise models better-suited for LLMs, as

well as alternative methods for querying such models (e.g.,

different prompt styles, better uncertainty calibration, etc.,).

Further, our approach could be coupled with Bayesian causal

discovery methods, replacing our MEC-based prior by one

derived from a learned posterior distribution over graphs.

References

Andrews, B., Spirtes, P., and Cooper, G. F.

On the

completeness of causal discovery in the presence of

latent confounding with tiered background knowledge.

In Chiappa, S. and Calandra, R. (eds.), Proceedings of

the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial

Intelligence and Statistics, volume 108 of Proceedings

of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4002–4011. PMLR,

26–28 Aug 2020.

URL https://proceedings.

mlr.press/v108/andrews20a.html.

Bai, Y., Kadavath, S., Kundu, S., Askell, A., Kernion,

J., Jones, A., Chen, A., Goldie, A., Mirhoseini, A.,

McKinnon, C., et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness

from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.

Beinlich, I. A., Suermondt, H. J., Chavez, R. M., and Cooper,

G. F. The alarm monitoring system: A case study with

two probabilistic inference techniques for belief networks.

pp. 247–256, 1989.

Binder, J., Koller, D., Russell, S., and Kanazawa, K.

Adaptive probabilistic networks with hidden variables.

Machine Learning, 29(2-3):213–244, 1997.

Brouillard, P., Lachapelle, S., Lacoste, A., Lacoste-Julien,

S., and Drouin, A. Differentiable causal discovery from

interventional data.

Advances in Neural Information

Processing Systems, 33:21865–21877, 2020.

Brouillard, P., Taslakian, P., Lacoste, A., Lachapelle, S., and

Drouin, A. Typing assumptions improve identification

in causal discovery. In Conference on Causal Learning

and Reasoning, pp. 162–177. PMLR, 2022.

Chen, E. Y.-J., Shen, Y., Choi, A., and Darwiche, A. Learning

bayesian networks with ancestral constraints. Advances

in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.

Chickering, D. M. Optimal structure identification with

greedy search. Journal of machine learning research, 3

(Nov):507–554, 2002.

Choi, K., Cundy, C., Srivastava, S., and Ermon, S. Lmpriors:

Pre-trained language models as task-specific priors. arXiv

preprint arXiv: 2210.12530, 2022.

Constantinou, A. C., Guo, Z., and Kitson, N. K.

The

impact of prior knowledge on causal structure learning.

Knowledge and Information Systems, pp. 1–50, 2023.

de Campos, L. M. and Castellano, J. G. Bayesian network

learning algorithms using structural restrictions. Interna-

tional Journal of Approximate Reasoning, 45(2):233–254,

2007.

Eberhardt, F., Glymour, C., and Scheines, R. On the number

of experiments sufficient and in the worst case necessary

to identify all causal relations among n variables.

In

Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2005.

Glymour, C., Zhang, K., and Spirtes, P. Review of causal dis-

covery methods based on graphical models. Frontiers in

Genetics, 10, 2019. ISSN 1664-8021. doi: 10.3389/fgene.

2019.00524.

URL https://www.frontiersin.

org/articles/10.3389/fgene.2019.00524.

Hobbhahn, M., Lieberum, T., and Seiler, D. Investigating

causal understanding in llms. 2022.

Kadavath, S., Conerly, T., Askell, A., Henighan, T., Drain,

D., Perez, E., Schiefer, N., Dodds, Z. H., DasSarma, N.,

Tran-Johnson, E., et al. Language models (mostly) know

what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.

Kıcıman, E., Ness, R., Sharma, A., and Tan, C. Causal rea-

soning and large language models: Opening a new frontier

for causality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00050, 2023.

Lauritzen, S. L. and Spiegelhalter, D. J. Local computation

with probabilities on graphical structures and their

application to expert systems (with discussion). Journal

of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical

Methodology), 50(2):157–224, 1988.

Li, A. and Beek, P. Bayesian network structure learning with

side constraints. In International conference on proba-

bilistic graphical models, pp. 225–236. PMLR, 2018.

Long, S., Schuster, T., and Pich´e, A. Can large language

models build causal graphs?

arXiv preprint arXiv:

2303.05279, 2023.

## Page 6

Causal Discovery with Language Models as Imperfect Experts

Maathuis, M. H., Kalisch, M., and B¨uhlmann, P.

Es-

timating high-dimensional intervention effects from

observational data.

The Annals of Statistics, 37(6A):

3133 – 3164, 2009. doi: 10.1214/09-AOS685. URL

https://doi.org/10.1214/09-AOS685.

Meek, C. Causal inference and causal explanation with

background knowledge. In Proceedings of the Eleventh

Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,

UAI’95, pp. 403–410, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1995.

Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN 1558603859.

Mooij, J. M., Peters, J., Janzing, D., Zscheischler,

## J.,

and

Sch¨olkopf,

## B.

Distinguishing

cause

from

effect

using

observational

data:

Methods

and

benchmarks.

Journal

of

Machine

Learn-

ing Research, 17(32):1–102, 2016.

URL http:

//jmlr.org/papers/v17/14-518.html.

Mooij, J. M., Magliacane, S., and Claassen, T. Joint causal

inference from multiple contexts. The Journal of Machine

Learning Research, 21(1):3919–4026, 2020.

Oates, C., Kasza, J., Simpson, J., and Forbes, A. Repair of

partly misspecified causal diagrams. Epidemiology, 28,

2017.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023a.

OpenAI, R. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv, pp. 2303–08774,

2023b.

Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright,

C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray,

A., et al. Training language models to follow instructions

with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information

Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.

Peters, J., Janzing, D., and Sch¨olkopf, B. Elements of causal

inference: foundations and learning algorithms. The MIT

Press, 2017.

Runge, J., Bathiany, S., Bollt, E., Camps-Valls, G., Coumou,

D., Deyle, E., Glymour, C., Kretschmer, M., Mahecha,

M. D., Mu˜noz-Mar´ı, J., et al. Inferring causation from time

series in earth system sciences. Nature communications,

10(1):2553, 2019.

Sachs, K., Perez, O., Pe’er, D., Lauffenburger, D. A., and

Nolan, G. P. Causal protein-signaling networks derived

from multiparameter single-cell data. Science, 308(5721):

523–529, 2005.

Scheines, R., Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., Meek, C., and

Richardson, T. The tetrad project: Constraint based aids

to causal model specification. Multivariate Behavioral

Research, 33(1):65–117, 1998.

Scutari, M. Learning bayesian networks with the bnlearn

R package. Journal of Statistical Software, 35(3):1–22,

2010. doi: 10.18637/jss.v035.i03.

Spiegelhalter, D. J. and Cowell, R. G.

Learning in

probabilistic expert systems. pp. 447–466, 1992.

Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., and Scheines, R. Constructing

bayesian network models of gene expression networks

from microarray data. 2000.

Spirtes, P. L., Meek, C., and Richardson, T. S.

Causal

inference in the presence of latent variables and selection

bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.4983, 2013.

Tu, R., Ma, C., and Zhang, C. Causal-discovery performance

of chatgpt in the context of neuropathic pain diagnosis.

2023.

Willig, M., Zeˇcevi´c, M., Dhami, D. S., and Kersting, K.

Can foundation models talk causality?

arXiv preprint

arXiv:2206.10591, 2022.

Zheng, X., Aragam, B., Ravikumar, P. K., and Xing, E. P.

Dags with no tears: Continuous optimization for structure

learning.

Advances in neural information processing

systems, 31, 2018.

## Page 7

Causal Discovery with Language Models as Imperfect Experts

A. Additional Experimental Results

5

10

15

MEC Size |

## E, S|

alarm

0

10

20

30

insurance

0

5

10

15

20

child

2

4

6

asia

1

2

3

4

## Shd

0

5

10

15

0

5

10

1

2

3

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

p(G *

## E, S)

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

0.1-expert

0.3-expert

text-davinci-002

text-davinci-002-naive

text-davinci-003

text-davinci-003-naive

Figure 3. All results for strategy Srisk. We observe that the MEC size consistently decreases as the tolerance level is increased.

5

10

15

MEC Size |

## E, S|

alarm

0

10

20

30

insurance

5

10

15

20

child

2

4

6

asia

1

2

3

4

## Shd

0

5

10

15

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

1

2

3

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

p(G *

## E, S)

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

Tolerance ( )

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

0.1-expert

0.3-expert

text-davinci-002

text-davinci-002-naive

text-davinci-003

text-davinci-003-naive

Figure 4. All results for strategy Ssize. We observe that the MEC size consistently decreases as the tolerance level is increased.

## Page 8

Causal Discovery with Language Models as Imperfect Experts

Table 1. Characteristics of included causal networks

Dataset

# Nodes

# Edges

Parameters

Asia

8

8

18

## Child

20

25

230

Insurance

27

52

1008

## Alarm

37

46

509

B. Implementation details

The code for this work is available at https://github.com/StephLong614/Causal-disco.

C. Details for the BnLearn causal Bayesian networks

Acquisition: All Bayesian network structures were acquired from https://www.bnlearn.com/bnrepository/.

Variable metadata: For each of the included causal Bayesian networks, we extracted a code book, i.e., a list of variable

names and an associated description (e.g., ’birth asphyxia’: ’lack of oxygen to the blood during birth’), from the associated

original paper. For instance, for the CHILD network, this information was extracted from Spiegelhalter & Cowell (1992).

All code books are available at: https://github.com/StephLong614/Causal-disco/tree/main/codebooks.

Metadata pitfalls: Certain Bayesian networks contain edge orientations between variable pairs that appear incongruent

with intuitive reasoning. For example, in the CHILD Network (Figure 6 ), the edge orientation between disease and age

exhibits a counterintuitive direction: disease→age. Implying the causal relationship of “disease causes age” rather than

the more intuitive and expected “age causes disease”.

D. Details for LLM-based experts

D.1. Querying for edge orientations

In order to obtain a probability distribution over the orientations of an edge, we use a prompt similar to Bai et al. (2022).

We use the following prompt format:

Among these two options which one is the most likely true:

(A) {µi} {verbk} {µj}

(B) {µj} {verbk} {µi}

The answer is:

where verbk is randomized at each decision and the variables .

For example, if we wanted to elicit a prediction for the direction of an edge between variables with metadata µi: “lung cancer”,

µj: “cigarette smoking”, and causation verb verbk: “causes” we would use the following prompt:

Among these two options which one is the most likely true:

(A) lung cancer causes cigarette smoking

(B) cigarette smoking causes lung cancer’

The answer is:

We then compute the log probability of the responses (A) and (B), and use the softmax to obtain a probability distribution

over the directions of the edge (Kadavath et al., 2022). Since we rely on scoring, instead of generation, the output of the

LLM-expert is deterministic given a fixed prompt. To foster randomness in the LLM-expert outputs, we randomly draw

verbk from the following verbs of causation: provokes, triggers, causes, leads to, induces, results in, brings about, yields,

generates, initiates, produces, stimulates, instigates, fosters, engenders, promotes, catalyzes, gives rise to, spurs, and sparks.

E. Causal Bayesian networks included

We included the following causal Bayesian networks in this work. All were extracted from the bnlearn Repository

https://www.bnlearn.com/bnrepository/.

## Page 9

Causal Discovery with Language Models as Imperfect Experts

Figure 5. Asia Bayesian network representing a fictitious medical illustrating possible causes of shortness-of-breath (dyspnoae) (Lauritzen

& Spiegelhalter, 1988). Abbreviations: asia = visit to Asia?; tub = Tuberculosis; either = either tuberculosis or lung cancer; lung = lung

cancer; bronc = bronchitis; dysp = dyspnoae. ]

Figure 6. CHILD Bayesian network which represents the presentation of six possible conditions that lead to “blue babies” i.e., birth asphyxia

(Spiegelhalter & Cowell, 1992). Abbreviations: LungParench = Lung parenchyma, LVH = left ventricular hypertrophy; HypDistrib =

hypoxia distribution; RUQO2 = right upper quad oxygen level.

## Page 10

Causal Discovery with Language Models as Imperfect Experts

Figure 7. ALARM Bayesian network representing a diagnostic application for patient monitoring which includes 8 diagnoses, 16 findings,

and 13 intermediate variables (Beinlich et al., 1989). Abbreviations: MINVOLSET = minute ventilation; VENTMACH = ventilation

machine; PULMEMBOLOUS = pulmonary embolism; PAP = pulmonary artery pressure; FIO2 = fraction of inspired oxygen; MINVOL

= minute volume; VENTALV = alveolar ventilation; PVSAT = pulmonary artery oxygen saturation ; ARTCO2 = arterial CO2; TPR =

total peripheral resistance; SAO2 = oxygen saturation; EXPCO2 = expelled CO2; LVFAILURE = left ventricular failure; CATECHOL

= catecholamine; LVEDVOLUME = left ventricular end-diastolic volume; HR = heart rate; ERR = error; PCWP = pulmonary capillary

wedge pressure; CVP = central venous pressure; CO = cardiac output; HRBP = rate blood pressure; HRSAT = heart rate saturation

Figure 8. Insurance Bayesian network illustrating factors that affect expected claim costs for a car insurance policyholder (Binder et al.,

1997). Abbreviations: DrivHist = driving history; ILiCost = insurance liability cost; PropCost = property cost
